hello i'm dermott manahan and welcome to
the sky news daily podcast
[Music]
so i'm just putting up a price graph now
a bitcoin i've got a five-year price
graph and in five years
bitcoin has gone up apparently 12 085
and i checked this morning the total
value of all the bitcoin in existence
and apparently it's worth at this point
just under one trillion
dollars which is about 120 for every
single human in the
on the planet um it the price rise has
been
phenomenal um unbelievable and
especially in the last year i think let
me see what's it done in the last year
it's gone
up over 500 percent gary stevenson is an
economist with a knack for breaking down
the complicated
okay so first of all there are many many
different cryptocurrencies uh the most
famous of all is bitcoin um
they all come down basically to the same
thing which is um the idea
is it's a completely online currency um
so transactions are completely managed
online theoretically there's
no one else in control of these these
cryptocurrencies so
normal money um you have to go through
the banking system you have to go to the
central banking system at the bank of
england
whereas these cryptocurrencies they're
all online the problem
is they often don't work very well as
currencies
in the sense that you normally can't use
bitcoin or crypto to pay your bills
or to go shopping at the supermarket or
to pay your taxes
which sort of raises the question are
they currencies at all
um certain people on the internet will
passionately tell you that they are but
in reality at the moment you can't
really use them for most of your
financial transactions or your
day-to-day transactions
so i think what they have become
especially in the last
couple of years really is speculative
investments
i think most people buying these
cryptocurrencies including bitcoin
especially in the last year have been
doing it largely rather than with the
intention of using them
as currencies rather to buy them and
hold them and hope that the
price appreciates so you think it's
turned just into speculation
that you know people have been doing for
years on i mean
you used to be physical commodities now
it's a virtual one
personally that is my stance uh i know a
lot of people get very angry at me on
the internet after saying that
just because we're moving online that
doesn't mean we're going to move towards
a cryptocurrency system so
in my personal opinion i don't think we
are moving towards a world where
most transactions are done in
cryptocurrency i think even
in a very long time horizon that's not
going to happen um but obviously some
people
many many people clearly if you look at
the price of bitcoin recently
um many people believe that we will go
that way i think it's a
speculative bubble okay but just tell me
more about
how it all works then and this issue of
mining bitcoin what is that okay so
there's various different
cryptocurrencies let's stick to bitcoin
because it's by far the biggest and the
most well known
so one of the big appeals of bitcoin
is the idea that supply is theoretically
limited
and i think we need to understand this
in the context of
what's been happening in the real
monetary system the real world monetary
system
over the last 10 years and especially
the last one year which is
in response to coronavirus crisis
governments and central banks have
together printed and injected into the
economy an enormous amount of new
money so in this country in the uk it's
about 10 000 pounds per adult
they've injected a huge amount of money
in and this has meant
that a lot of people are worried okay
all of this new money coming into the
system
is going to push prices up it's going to
devalue my currency so they're looking
for an investment that
has a limited supply so this is one of
the big appeals of bitcoin and crypto
the idea is
you can only make new bitcoin by
mining it which is um in reality getting
a computer to do some complicated
cryptographic
mathematics and the more bitcoin that
gets made
the more difficult it becomes to make
more bitcoin which means
in the long run it basically becomes
impossible or virtually impossible to
make
more bitcoin what this means is bitcoin
has a limited supply and that's one of
the reasons why
people love it on the internet because
they say real money
the central banks are bringing loads of
it but bitcoin has limited supply
one of the problems which might ask me
is this has some environmental issues
which
perhaps you're going to get onto well
well okay well let's let's do that now
because if all these
computers have to work harder and harder
to mine less and less bitcoin
then energy consumption just goes up and
up and up
yeah so basically the process of mining
is essentially
using electricity the computing power is
there you're converting electricity
essentially into bitcoin
um when bitcoin is very cheap and it
used to be much much cheaper than it is
now
i think it's uh you know you don't have
to go that long back ago and it was 10
times cheaper
um it became inefficient to make
new bitcoins once electricity reached a
certain price but as the price of
bitcoin goes up and up and up
suddenly it becomes extremely profitable
to create bitcoin no matter how
expensive the electricity is
and what this means is it becomes
profitable
to pour huge amounts of electricity at
the moment into the creation of new
bitcoin
and i think i saw the other day that it
was something like
if you list all of the countries in the
world of how much electricity they use
bitcoin was i think 14th or 15th which
tells you i think just above argentina
that's how much electricity
bitcoin uses at the moment and um
this problem will only get worse if the
price continues to increase and the
price is increasing at phenomenal pace
um as bitcoin gets more and more
expensive it makes more and more
financial sense
for people to use more electricity to
make more bitcoin
so um it's you know the idea that one
single currency can be using as much
electricity as the whole of argentina
basically tells you
that we do have an environmental problem
on our hands
the stats that gary's referring to there
come from the university of cambridge
center for
alternative finance at 127 terawatt
hours per year
bitcoin did indeed surpass the energy
consumption of countries like
argentina and norway in 2019.
to put that slightly differently it
would take the uk 28 years of kettle
boiling
to use the same amount of energy bitcoin
used in
just one and let's talk about the prices
as you say it was an awful lot cheaper
not very long ago
but we keep hearing stories and this no
doubt is one of its attractions
of people putting in well a few hundred
dollars or a few hundred pounds and
becoming millionaires
the truth is people love to buy a thing
that has the chance of doubling
and there are plenty of people who've
bought bitcoin in the last year and
doubled their money
um but that doesn't mean it's a wise
investment there are plenty of people
who've doubled their money by going into
a casino and putting it on
black but this is the way speculative
bubble works you know people like to buy
things that have gone up a lot
which means that when something goes up
a lot more buyers come which means it
goes up more which means more buyers
come which means it goes up more
um these usually end in only one way you
know last time you called me on was
gamestop
that was a very similar situation i
predicted a crash
we saw a crash um i think these
cryptocurrencies will crash
at one point but um i wouldn't like to
tell you exactly when and how high from
but uh i would just like to say to
people out there who are thinking about
getting involved
can you double your money possibly yes
but you also can definitely lose all
your money so
please people watching don't risk any
more money on bitcoin than you can
afford to lose
all of and is there another way that um
cryptocurrencies in general could go in
that they
just become normalized you you can buy
them out of cash machines and use them
to
to go about your daily business they
they just become another
international currency and the advantage
of that of course is that then there are
no exchange rates
uh listen it's not impossible it's
definitely not impossible um i don't
know if you've ever tried to do any
transactions with bitcoin
i think you'll find that uh it's not
very easy to do
at the moment it's not easily transacted
with bitcoins and it can be expensive
um but of course if it became much more
widely used it could become cheaper
so the problem with this you know if i
could talk a little bit get into the
economic history of the history of money
i used to be a money trader
um before we had the current monetary
system and the current monetary system
the money is
not backed by anything it's just created
by the central bank and they promised to
limit the supplier to try and control
inflation
before that we had the gold money system
which in effect was roughly a limited
supply system similar to the bitcoin
system
and we actually found that there are a
lot of problems with that system where
you have a limited money supply
for example if suddenly there's a big
increase in the demand for money
you can't increase the supply for money
and people who have debts can become
bankrupted we can have massive deflation
and this was actually one of the big
causes behind the great depression
and for me i actually think the reason
why the 2008 great recession was not as
bad as the great depression
was because central banks were able to
pump a lot more money in the system
and you know this last year in kovid
central banks have pumped
huge amounts of money into the system
and that is the entire reason why
governments have been able to pay for
for example the photo scheme if we were
under a bitcoin system
that would have been totally impossible
so i think we have to be aware that you
know we've tried
fixed money systems in the past under
the gold system and they have big
problems
now that's not to say that the current
money system doesn't have problems you
know one of the most obvious problems
is that we keep seeing house prices go
up and up stock prices go up and up and
that causes big increases inequality
but i don't think going to a bitcoin
system where we basically take away the
power of governments and central banks
to do things like the furlough scheme
i don't think that's going to help i
think that's actually going to cause
more harm than good in the long run
richest in our society are making
billions off of kobe 19.
that is going to keep our economy in a
crisis for decades how many times
can you get paid a load of money for
betting the world's going to be terrible
forever
you